---  
layout: post  
title: Klutter 2023.1.1: Compiler plugin
---  

The first beta version of klutter is here, and it brings some exciting changes:
- **A compiler plugin.**
- Support for Flutter EventChannels.
- Improved datatype support.
- Easier dependency management.

In this article I would like to talk about the compiler plugin and how it improves the developer experience of klutter.
If you're just interested in the changes then skip to the summary bellow or see the [changelog](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) for the full list.

# KSP
The klutter compiler plugin is implemented using [KSP](https://github.com/google/ksp), which stands for Kotlin Symbol Processing.
KSP gives you complete sourcecode information during compilation. This is great for Klutter because sourcecode analysis is a 
major component of the framework. For every class or method annotated with a Klutter annotation, KSP can collect the sourcecode information.
This made it a lot easier to support more standard data types like Maps. Yes, klutter now supports a data types of the 
Flutter [StandardMessageCodec](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/services/StandardMessageCodec-class.html)! 
More on that in the next article.

# Functionality
Before klutter 2023.1.1.beta you'd have to do the following to build your plugin/app:

Build the iOS/Android artifacts:

```shell
flutter pub run klutter:producer install=platform 
```

Then next you'd have to run the following to generate the boilerplate code (data classes, handlers, etc):

```shell
flutter pub run klutter:producer install=library
```

These steps are not really independent of each other.
Any change in the platform module always requires building new artifacts for iOS/Android to make the code accessible.
Then code generation is required to call the methods from the platform side.
There is also code generation required to update boilerplate in the dart lib folder.
Leaving out any one of these steps would result in unexpected behavior.
For example update if you'd generate the handler code in Android but don't copy the aar file, then the app won't even start.

The compiler plugin prevents these kinds of errors by executing all the mandatory steps everytime a build is done.
When you want to test your klutter plugin on a device, all you have to do now is:

```shell
./gradlew build -p "platform"
```

The compiler plugin then does the following:
- Scan the platform module for classes and methods with applicable annotations.
- Generate code in root/lib (basically the Flutter plugin interface).
- Generate code in root/android (flutter - platform glue).
- Generate code in root/ios (flutter - ios glue).

With KSP you can execute pre-compilation tasks but not post-compilation tasks, e.g. you can't
instruct KSP to do something after the build is completed. The compiler plugin therefore can
successfully do all the code-generation and build the required artifacts, but
is unable to make these artifacts available to the iOS/Android platforms.

The tasks to do so are added by the klutter gradle plugin (assemblePlatformReleaseXCFramework,
klutterCopyFramework, klutterCopyAarFile). 
The platform build.gradle.kts binds these tasks to the build phase:

```kotlin
tasks.build.get()
    .setFinalizedBy(listOf(
        tasks.getByName("assemblePlatformReleaseXCFramework"),
        tasks.getByName("klutterCopyAarFile")))

tasks.getByName("assemblePlatformReleaseXCFramework")
    .setFinalizedBy(listOf(tasks.getByName("klutterCopyFramework")))
```

Would it have been nice to add this to the compiler plugin (a post-proces task of sorts)? Definitely.
But this works for now.

# Implementation
Let's have a quick look at the compiler 
[implementation](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/tree/main/lib/compiler/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/compiler).
I separated the plugin into 4 logical parts:
- Processor
- Scanner
- Validator
- Wrapper

## Processor
You start of with KSP by creating your own [processor](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/tree/main/lib/compiler/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/compiler/processor).
The SymbolProcessor is basically the starting point for your plugin. 
You overwrite the process method which takes in a Resolver argument and their you implement your logic.
Compilation arguments can be passed to the processor by using the KspExtension, for example:

```kotlin
ksp {
    arg("klutterScanFolder", project.buildDir.absolutePath)
    arg("klutterOutputFolder", project.projectDir.parentFile.absolutePath)
    arg("klutterGenerateAdapters", "true")
    arg("intelMac", "false") // Set to "true" if you're building on an Intel Mac!
}
```

I value TypeSafety, so I 
[wrapped](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/lib/compiler/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/compiler/processor/ProcessorOptions.kt) 
the possible arguments in an enumeration and data class.

## Scanner
For each type of annotation I made a separate scanner. These scanners lookup all symbols with applicable
annotations and return a list of valid/invalid data. During this scanning phase it is already possible 
to determine some kind of invalid result. I like to keep that kind of information on one place so for
each annotation Type I made a [result](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/lib/compiler/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/compiler/scanner/ResponseResults.kt) file listing all these kind of results.

## Validator
When all scanning is complete then the sources should be validated. Keeping in line with the former packages,
I again made a separate Validator for each annotation type. The validator looks at the collected metadata
as a whole and validates it. For example the [ControllerValidator](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/lib/compiler/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/compiler/validator/ControllerValidator.kt)
will return a validation result if duplicate controller names are detected.

## Wrapper
Finally, the wrapper package contains a few data classes which encapsulate KSP specific classes.
This is a personal preference, but I prefer not to look implementation details of external dependencies
into my own sourcecode. That way you prevent having to rewrite a lot of your code if a dependency has
breaking changes.

## Applying
To use KSP you have to apply the KSP plugin in your build.gradle.kts file and then also add the processor implementation to your dependencies.
I try to keep the build.gradle.kts file as clean as possible, so I let the Klutter Gradle plugin apply the KspGradleSubplugin by default.
The processor should then be added as a dependency in the kspCommonMainMetadata (for a multiplatform project). This does not work
if you add a dependency in the multiplatform sourcesets. I added a helper [method](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/lib/gradle/src/main/kotlin/dev/buijs/klutter/gradle/dsl/KlutterExtension.kt) 
to the Klutter Gradle plugin to handle this for you:

```kotlin
klutter {
    compiler()
}
```

Klutter 2023.1.1.beta also comes with a "bill-of-materials" dependency which makes the compiler() method
obsolete, unless you want to work with a different compiler version (not recommended, but very usefull for testing).
More on that in a later article.

# Logging
The compiler plugin does a lot which means a lot can go wrong. Everytime a build is done, the compiler plugin
saves it's logging output to root/compiler.log. For every step the compiler log contains information
of the metadata it processed and what the output was. Be sure to always check this log if you're having
issues.

# Summary
The biggest benefit of implementing a compiler plugin is that executing a gradle build is enough to compile your platform
sourcecode and fire up the app on your device. Metadata processing is a lot more reliable than in former versions due to the 
KSP AST model. This made it easier to support more standard data types like Maps.
Checkout the [changelog](https://github.com/buijs-dev/klutter/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) if you want to know
what else has improved in klutter 2023.1.1.beta. 